Primitives (non runtime) changes for 1.0 (#812)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/verify/simulate-with-qiskit-primitives.mdx

      element is the expectation value corresponding to the `i`<sup>th</sup> circuit and `i`<sup>th</sup> observable.
      To see the values for the first (and in this case, only) circuit evaluation, we must access the first item of the array.

```python
print(f" > Expectation value: {result.values[0]}")
print(f" > Metadata: {result.metadata}")
```

```text
 > Expectation value: 3.999999999999999
 > Metadata: [{}, {}, {}]
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Set Estimator run options

By default, the reference Estimator performs an exact statevector calculation based on the
[`quantum_info.Statevector`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector) class.
However, this can be modified to introduce the effect of the sampling overhead (also known as "shot noise").

With the introduction of the new V2 interface, the sampling overhead in the Estimator is now more concretely defined.
The new interface accepts a `precision` argument that expresses the error bars that the
primitive implementation should target for expectation values estimates,
instead of the number of `shots` used in the V1 interface.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">

>       The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, and is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
>       method level. This allows for a more finely-grained tuning of the option all the way to the PUB level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, and is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
      method level. This allows for a more finely-grained tuning of the option all the way to the PUB level.
      
      This example assumes you have defined two circuits, each with its own array of observables.
```

    ```python
    # Estimate expectation values for two PUBs, both with 0.05 precision.
    estimator.run([(isa_circuit1, isa_obs_array1), (isa_circuit2, isa_obs_array_2)], precision=0.05)
    ```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="V1" label="Estimator (V1)">

      The V1 interface specifies shots in the following ways:

        - Setting keyword arguments in the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method.
        - Modifying the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) options.

    ```python
    job = estimator.run(isa_circuit, isa_observable, shots=2048, seed=123)
    result = job.result()
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> See more examples on the [Primitives examples](/run/primitives-examples#estimator-examples) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a full example, see the [Primitives examples](/run/primitives-examples#estimator-examples) page.
```

The new interface accepts a `precision` argument that expresses the error bars that the
primitive implementation should target for expectation values estimates,
instead of the number of `shots` used in the V1 interface.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">

      The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, and is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
      method level. This allows for a more finely-grained tuning of the option all the way to the PUB level.

    ```python
    # Estimate expectation values for two PUBs, both with 0.05 precision.
    estimator.run([(isa_circuit1, isa_obs_array1), (isa_circuit2, isa_obs_array_2)], precision=0.05)
    ```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="V1" label="Estimator (V1)">

      The V1 interface specifies shots in the following ways:

        - Setting keyword arguments in the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method.
        - Modifying the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) options.

    ```python
    job = estimator.run(isa_circuit, isa_observable, shots=2048, seed=123)
    result = job.result()

>     print(result)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

computed expectation values.

The following code prepares the inputs that will be used in the examples that follow. The expected input type for the
observables is [`qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp). Note that
the circuit in the example is parametrized, but you can also run the Estimator on non-parametrized circuits.

<Admonition type="note">
  Any circuit passed to an Estimator must **not** include any **measurements**.
</Admonition>
```python
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

# circuit for which you want to obtain the expected value
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.ry(Parameter('theta'), 0)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.draw("mpl", style="iqp")
```
![Initial QuantumCircuit](/images/verify/simulate-with-qiskit-primitives/estimator-initialize.png "Initial QuantumCircuit")

```python
# observable(s) whose expected values you want to compute
observable = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XX", "YY", "ZZ"], coeffs=[1, 1, -1, 1])

# value(s) for the circuit parameter(s)
import numpy as np
parameter_values = [[0], [np.pi/6], [np.pi/2]]
```

> ### Initialize Estimator

Reviewer 2: I would add a note on ISA conversion before splitting into the V1-V2 estimator workflows (note that I added an extra `python` at the end of the code cell, because the closing ``` were detected at the end of the suggestion, it should be removed).

```suggestion
The Qiskit Runtime primitives workflow requires circuits and observables to be transformed to only use instructions supported by the system (referred to as *instruction set architecture (ISA)* circuits and observables). The reference primitives still accept abstract instructions, as they rely on local statevector simulations, but transpiling the circuit might still be beneficial in terms of circuit optimization. 

```python
# Generate a pass manager without providing a backend
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(optimization_level=1)
isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)
isa_observable = observable.apply_layout(isa_circuit.layout)
```python

### Initialize Estimator
```

Reviewer: Addressed 596a5d854164e7ff566f095234a01bbafb41379c

[`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator). If you want to maintain
your pre-existing workflow using an Estimator V1 implementation, you can also use the
[`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) class.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">
    Instantiate a [`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator).

```python
from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorEstimator
estimator = StatevectorEstimator()
```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">
    Instantiate a [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator).

```python
from qiskit.primitives import Estimator
estimator = Estimator()
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Run and get results

This example only uses one circuit (of type [`QuantumCircuit`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit)) and one
observable.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">
    Run the estimation by calling the [`StatevectorEstimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator#run)

>     method, which returns an instance of a [PrimitiveJob](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob) object. You can get the results from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    method, which returns an instance of a [`PrimitiveJob`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob) object. You can get the results from the
```

    job (as a [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult) object)

>     with the [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult.primitiveresult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult#primitiveresult) method.

Reviewer 2: After a second look I think that the method we would be looking for is:
```suggestion
    with the [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob#result) method.
```

```python

> # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
> from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

Reviewer 2: If we transpile above, no need to do it here:

```suggestion
```

> pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
> isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> job = estimator.run([(isa_circuit, observable, parameter_values)])

Reviewer 2: The observable must be isa too:

```suggestion
job = estimator.run([(isa_circuit, isa_observable, parameter_values)])
```

result = job.result()
print(f" > Result class: {type(result)}")
```
```text
 > Result class: <class 'qiskit.primitives.containers.primitive_result.PrimitiveResult'>
```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">
    Run the estimation by calling the [`Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method,
    which returns an instance of [`qiskit.providers.JobV1`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1). You can get the results from the
    job (as an [`EstimatorResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult) object)
    with the [`JobV1.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1#result) method.

```python

> # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
> from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
> isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> job = estimator.run([isa_circuit]*3, [observable]*3, parameter_values)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
job = estimator.run([isa_circuit] * 3, [isa_observable] * 3, parameter_values)
```

```python
print(f" > Expectation value: {result.values[0]}")
print(f" > Metadata: {result.metadata}")
```

```text
 > Expectation value: 3.999999999999999
 > Metadata: [{}, {}, {}]
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Set Estimator run options

By default, the reference Estimator performs an exact statevector calculation based on the
[`quantum_info.Statevector`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector) class.
However, this can be modified to introduce the effect of the sampling overhead (also known as "shot noise").

With the introduction of the new V2 interface, the sampling overhead in the Estimator is now more concretely defined.
The new interface accepts a `precision` argument that expresses the error bars that the
primitive implementation should target for expectation values estimates,
instead of the number of `shots` used in the V1 interface.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">

      The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, and is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
      method level. This allows for a more finely-grained tuning of the option all the way to the PUB level.

    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

Reviewer 2: Given that circuit 1 and 2 don't "exist" (haven't been defined), and we already have the ISA explanation before. In this case I would jump directly to showing the `estimator.run()`:

```suggestion
```

>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit1 = pm.run(circuit1)
>     isa_circuit2 = pm.run(circuit2)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    # Estimate expectation values for two PUBs, both with 0.05 precision.

>     estimator.run([(isa_circuit1, obs_array1), (isa_circuit2, obs_array_2)], precision=0.05)

Reviewer 2: The observables also need to be ISA:

```suggestion
    estimator.run([(isa_circuit1, isa_obs_array1), (isa_circuit2, isa_obs_array_2)], precision=0.05)
```

    ```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="V1" label="Estimator (V1)">

      The V1 interface specifies shots in the following ways:

        - Setting keyword arguments in the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method.
        - Modifying the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) options.

    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above:

```suggestion
```

>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     job = estimator.run(isa_circuit, observable, shots=2048, seed=123)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    job = estimator.run(isa_circuit, isa_observable, shots=2048, seed=123)
```

    result = job.result()

>     print(result)

Reviewer 2: Missing output

Reviewer: Added e331fa0c1c4cabfc0afdeac21644b2c6deebb28d but does it look right?

Reviewer: Becky recommends deleting the print(result) line since the V2 version doesn't have output, so keeping the V1 parallel

# Exact simulation with Qiskit primitives

> The reference primitives in Qiskit&reg; perform local statevector simulations. These simulations do not support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reference primitives in Qiskit perform local statevector simulations. These simulations do not support
```

techniques (using Qiskit Aer) or running on real devices (Qiskit Runtime primitives).

The `Estimator` primitive can compute expectation values of circuits, and the `Sampler` primitive can sample
from output distributions of circuits.

The following sections show how to use the reference primitives to run your workflow locally.

## Use the reference `Estimator`

There are two reference implementations of `Estimator` in `qiskit.primitives` that run on a local statevector
simulators: the [`StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator) class and the
[`Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) class. The [`StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator)
implements the new Estimator V2 interface introduced in the Qiskit SDK 1.0, and offers additional input vectorization
features in comparison with the [`Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) class, which implements the
legacy Estimator V1 interface. Both can take circuits, observables, and parameters as inputs and return the locally
computed expectation values.

> The following code prepares the inputs that will be used in the examples below. The expected input type for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code prepares the inputs that will be used in the examples that follow. The expected input type for the
```

observables is [`qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp). Note that
the circuit in the example is parametrized, but you can also run the Estimator on non-parametrized circuits.

<Admonition type="note">
  Any circuit passed to an Estimator must **not** include any **measurements**.
</Admonition>

```python
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

# circuit for which you want to obtain the expected value
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.ry(Parameter('theta'), 0)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.draw("mpl", style="iqp")

# observable(s) whose expected values you want to compute
observable = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XX", "YY", "ZZ"], coeffs=[1, 1, -1, 1])

# value(s) for the circuit parameter(s)
import numpy as np
theta_values = [[0], [np.pi/6], [np.pi/2]]
```

> TODO: fix circuit image (doesn't correspond to code)

Reviewer 2: To-do

your pre-existing workflow using an Estimator V1 implementation, you can also use the
[`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) class.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">
    Instantiate a [`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator).

```python
from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorEstimator
estimator = StatevectorEstimator()
```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">
    Instantiate an [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator).

```python
from qiskit.primitives import Estimator
estimator = Estimator()
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Run and get results

This example only uses one circuit (of type [`QuantumCircuit`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit)) and one
observable.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">
    Run the estimation by calling the [`StatevectorEstimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator#run)

>     method, which returns an instance of ... You can get the results from the

Reviewer 2: To-do -> look up the type of the output of `StatevectorEstimator.run` (it must be some kind of job class)

    job (as a [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult) object)

>     with the [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult.primitiveresult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult#primitiveresult) method.

Reviewer: @ElePT the previous link was broken ([`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult#result)) - here is what I changed it to; does it look right to you?

Reviewer 2: looks good!

```python
job = estimator.run([(qc, observable, parameter_values)])
result = job.result()
print(f" > Result class: {type(result)}")
```
```text

> ... (TODO:add output)

Reviewer 2: To-do (replace placeholder with real output)

EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])
```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">
    Run the estimation by calling the [`Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method,
    which returns an instance of [`qiskit.providers.JobV1`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1). You can get the results from the
    job (as an [`EstimatorResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult) object)
    with the [`JobV1.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1#result) method.

```python
job = estimator.run(qc, observable, parameter_values)
result = job.result()
print(f" > Result class: {type(result)}")
```
```text

> ... (TODO:add output)

Reviewer 2: To-do (replace placeholder with real output)

EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Get the expected value from the result

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">

>       The primitives V2 result outputs an array of `PubResult`s, where each item of the array is a `PubResult` object

Reviewer 2: To-do -> add api links

      that contains in its data the array of evaluations corresponding to every circuit-observable combination in the Pub.
      To retrieve the expectation values and metadata for the first
      (and in this case, only) circuit evaluation, we must access the evaluation `data` for pub 0:

```python
print(f" > Expectation value: {result[0].data.evs}")
print(f" > Metadata: {result[0].metadata}")
```
```text
... (TODO:add output)
...
```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">

      The primitives V1 result stores an array of values that can be accessed through the attribute
      [`EstimatorResult.values`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult#values), where the`i`<sup>th</sup>
      element is the expectation value corresponding to the `i`<sup>th</sup> circuit and `i`<sup>th</sup> observable.
      To see the values for the first (and in this case, only) circuit evaluation, we must access the first item of the array.

```python
print(f" > Expectation value: {result.values[0]}")
print(f" > Metadata: {result.metadata}")
```

```text

> ... (TODO:add output)

Reviewer 2: To-do (replace placeholder with real output)

...
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Set Estimator run options

By default, the reference Estimator performs an exact statevector calculation based on the
[`quantum_info.Statevector`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector) class.
However, this can be modified to introduce the effect of the sampling overhead (also known as "shot noise").

With the introduction of the new V2 interface, the sampling overhead in the Estimator is now more concretely defined.
The new interface accepts a `precision` argument that expresses the error bars that the
primitive implementation should target for expectation values estimates,
instead of the number of `shots` used in the V1 interface.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorEstimator (V2)">

>       The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, can is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
>       method level. This allows for a finer grained tuning of the option all the way to the pub level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The sampling overhead is now called `precision`, and is defined exclusively at the `.run()`
      method level. This allows for a more finely-grained tuning of the option all the way to the pub level.
```

    job = estimator.run(qc, observable, shots=2048, seed=123)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Use the reference `Sampler`

Similarly to the Estimator, there are two reference implementations of `Sampler` in `qiskit.primitives`:
the [`StatevectorSampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler) class and the
[`Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) class. The [`StatevectorSampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler)
implements the new Estimator V2 interface introduced in Qiskit 1.0, and offers additional input vectorization
features in comparison with the [`Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) class, which implements the
legacy Sampler V1 interface. Both can take circuits and parameters as inputs and return the results from sampling from
the output probability distributions, but they are expressed in different terms:

- The new StatevectorSampler (V2) output can be expressed as an array of sampled values (bitstring) or "counts"
  for each bitstring present in the output distribution.
- The Sampler (V1) output is always expressed as a quasi-probability distribution of output states.

> The following code prepares the inputs that will be used in the examples below. Note that
> these examples run a single circuit, and the circuit is parametrized, but you can also run the Sampler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code prepares the inputs used in the examples that follow. Note that
these examples run a single parametrized circuit, but you can also run the Sampler
```

> Follow these instructions to get the expected value of an observable for a given quantum circuit with the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) primitive.

Reviewer 3: This comment is for a couple of lines up, out of reach of this PR.

```
The `Estimator` primitive can compute an expectation value, and the `Sampler` primitive can compute circuit output probabilities. 
```

->

```
The `Estimator` primitive can compute expectation values of circuits, and the `Sampler` primitive can sample from output distributions of circuits. 
```

<Admonition type="note">

>   While this guide uses the Qiskit reference implementation, the `Estimator` primitive can be run with any provider using [`qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimator).

Reviewer 3: This should be linked to the EstimatorV2 in `qiskit-ibm-runtime` I think. At the moment, this is only available in a feature branch, so I'm not sure how the linking should be done right now. Maybe point to that project as a whole?

Reviewer 2: Removed reference to backend estimator in [d7c0f74](https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/812/commits/d7c0f740f42d07ba267dddc41963cb9ff4c2b946) after discussion to create a new topic for backend primitives.

  ```python

>   from qiskit.primitives import BackendEstimator

Reviewer 3: ```python
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import QiskitRuntimeService EstimatorV2

service = QiskitRuntimeService()
estimator = EstimatorV2(backend=service.backend("backend_name"))
```

and I suppose this is actually an example of a provider that is an example of this: "There are some providers that implement primitives natively (see [the Qiskit Ecosystem page](https://qiskit.github.io/ecosystem/#primitives) for more details)." 

It's somewhat confusing because qiskit_ibm_runtime is not actually a provider proper, it just provides provider-like abilities. There is no generic backend _and_ primitive V2 compatible implementation, like in this existing example.

Author: Are you recommending that we change these examples to use Qiskit Runtime?

Reviewer 3: I don't think I understand the goal of this document is well enough to answer that question confidently, because I've only looked at it briefly. I think the answer should be "yes" because qiskit_ibm_providers will be sunsetted and will never have a V2 implementation. Is this page supposed to talk about V1 and V2, or just V2?

Maybe @jyu00 can shed some light.

Reviewer 4: The goal of this document is for people to test their quantum program (that calls primitives) locally, before sending them to Qiskit Runtime to run on a real QPU. 

Most of this page uses the statevector simulator, and there is an equivalent for V2, better named as [StatevectorEstimator](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/qiskit/primitives/statevector_estimator.py#L31) and [StatevectorSampler](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/qiskit/primitives/statevector_sampler.py#L52). 

In this `Note`, however, it talks about `BackendEstimator` which is not yet available for v2 (this is the [issue](https://github.ibm.com/IBM-Q-Software/ws-primitives/issues/130)). Similarly, there is currently no implementation in Aer for V2. If we somehow don't get those done prior to the release, I'd suggest adding a note saying they're "coming soon" for v2.

Reviewer 2: This document was originally an introduction to primitives that talked about reference/backend/aer, but it has semi-evolved now to be a page on local simulation using the reference primitives. I think that the best action here is to remove the references to backend primitives and find them a new home, they don't fit here and in my opinion blur out the purpose of this page (I've made a couple of comments in this direction).

> ### Run and get results

Reviewer 3: (making this comment below the actual line)

Generic BaseOperator is not supported in V2 because that's not generally scalable. I suggest that

```
The first step is to define the observables whose expected value you want to compute. Each observable can be any `BaseOperator`, like the operators from [`qiskit.quantum_info`](../api/qiskit/quantum_info).
Among them it is preferable to use [`qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp).
```
changes to
```
The first step is to define the observables whose expected values you want to compute. Each observable can be a Pauli string, a dictionary mapping Pauli strings to real coefficients, or a [`qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp).
In this example, we define a single observable, but in general, you can attach many observables to a single circuit.
```

Reviewer 3: (making this comment below the actual line)

I suggest
```
Next, instantiate an [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator).

from qiskit.primitives import Estimator
estimator = Estimator()
```

be changed to

```
Next, instantiate an [`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator).

from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorEstimator
estimator = StatevectorEstimator()
```

> Now that you have defined your `estimator`, you can run your estimation by calling the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method,

Reviewer 3: change to statevector estimator, but note that BaseEstimatorV2 will have better docstring being the parent class.

```suggestion
Now that you have defined your `estimator`, you can run your estimation by calling the [`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorEstimator#run) method,
```

> which returns an instance of [`qiskit.providers.JobV1`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1). 

Reviewer 3: This class has changed. You have made me realize that this link won't work.

```suggestion
which returns an instance of [`qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveJob). 
```

> The V2 primitives take one or more primitive unified blocs (PUBs) as the inputs. Each PUB is a tuple that contains a single circuit and data broadcasted to that circuit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The V2 primitives take one or more primitive unified blocs (PUBs) as the inputs. Each PUB is a tuple that contains a single circuit and data broadcasted to that circuit.
The following example just uses a single observable, but a list or array of observables could be used instead, and an expectation value would be returned for each one.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="EstimatorV2">
    ```python
job = estimator.run([(qc, observable)])
result = job.result()
print(result)
```

You can get the results from the job (as a [`qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult) object)

> with the [`qiskit.providers.JobV1.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1#result) method.

Reviewer 3: EstimatorResult -> PrimitiveResult
providers.JobV1.result -> primitives.PrimitiveJob.result

Author: Right now I have these set up with V1 and V2 versions.  Will the V1 links no longer work though?

> ```python

Reviewer 3: Ah, is this meant to show both versions on one page, across tabs? If so, it would not be the same `estimator`.

```python
EstimatorResult(values=array([4.]), metadata=[{}])
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

This example only uses one [`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) and one observable. If you want to get expectation values for multiple circuits and observables, you can pass a `list` of [`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit)s and a list of `BaseOperator`s to the [`qiskit.primitives.Estimator.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator#run) method. Both `list`s must have the same length.

#### Get the expected value

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV2" label="EstimatorV2">
    ```python
print(f" > Expectation value: {result[0].data.evs}")
print(f" > Metadata: {result[0].metadata}")
```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="EstimatorV1" label="Estimator (V1)">
  From these results you can extract the expected values with the attribute [`qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult#values).

[`qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult.values`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.EstimatorResult#values) returns a `numpy.ndarray`

> whose `i`<sup>th</sup> element is the expectation value corresponding to the `i`<sup>th</sup> circuit and `i`<sup>th</sup> observable.

Reviewer 3: In this case, we are instead getting the 0th item from a PrimitiveResult, which is a PubResult, and then looking at the evs field PubResult.data, which is itself an ndarray.

Author: That's happening in V1 or V2?

Author: > In this case, we are instead getting the 0th item from a PrimitiveResult, which is a PubResult, and then looking at the evs field PubResult.data, which is itself an ndarray.

Is your comment about V1 or V2?

Reviewer 2: Addressed in [f21db70](https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/812/commits/f21db70cc23e1f49a385481afb2c0b002f812294).

<Admonition type="note">
Any quantum circuit passed to a Sampler **must** include measurements.
</Admonition>

### Initialize `Sampler`

To use the Sampler V2 implementation, follow the instructions to instantiate a
[`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler). If you want to maintain
your pre-existing workflow using a Sampler V1 implementation, you can also use the
[`qiskit.primitives.Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) class.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorSampler

sampler = StatevectorSampler()
```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="SamplerV1" label="Sampler (V1)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler

sampler = Sampler()
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Run and get results

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python
    # execute 1 circuit with 3 parameter sets using Sampler V2
    job = sampler_v2.run([(circuit, [vals1, vals2, vals3])])
    counts = job.result()[0].data.meas.get_counts()
    ```

>   V2 primitives accept multiple PUBs as inputs, and each pub gets its own result. This
>   lets you run different circuits with various parameter/observable combinations,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  V2 primitives accept multiple pubs as inputs, and each pub gets its own result.
  Therefore, you can run different circuits with various parameter/observable combinations,
```

    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()
    circuit.draw()
    ```

    ```python
    # Run using V1 sampler
    result = sampler_v1.run(circuit).result()
    quasi_dist = result.quasi_dists[0]
    print(f"The quasi-probability distribution is: {quasi_dist}")
    ```
    ```text
    The quasi-probability distribution is: {0: 0.5, 3: 0.5}
    ```

      If you prefer to see the output keys as binary strings instead of decimal numbers, you can use the [`qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution.binary_probabilities`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution#binary_probabilities) method.

    ```python
    print(quasi_dist.binary_probabilities())
    ```

    ```python
    {'00': 0.4999999999999999, '11': 0.4999999999999999}
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Change run options

By default, the reference Sampler performs an exact statevector calculation based on the
[`quantum_info.Statevector`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector) class.
However, this can be modified to introduce the effect of the sampling overhead (also known as "shot noise").

With the introduction of the new V2 interface, the sampling overhead in the Sampler is now more precisely defined.

> The new interface accepts a `shots` argument that can be defined at the "pub level"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new interface accepts a `shots` argument that can be defined at the "pub level".
```

The new interface accepts a `shots` argument that can be defined at the "PUB level".

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">

    ```python
    # Sample two circuits at 128 shots each.
    sampler.run([isa_circuit1, isa_circuit2], shots=128)
    # Sample two circuits at different amounts of shots. The "None"s are necessary
    # as placeholders
    # for the lack of parameter values in this example.
    sampler.run([(isa_circuit1, None, 123), (isa_circuit2, None, 456)])
    ```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="V1" label="Sampler (V1)">

      The V1 interface specifies shots in the following ways:

        - Setting keyword arguments in the [`Sampler.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler#run) method.
        - Modifying the [`Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) options.

    ```python
    job = sampler.run(isa_circuit,  shots=2048, seed=123)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)
    ```
    ```text
    SamplerResult(quasi_dists=[{0: 0.5205078125, 3: 0.4794921875}], metadata=[{'shots': 2048}])
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> See more examples on the [Primitives examples](/run/primitives-examples#sampler-examples) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a full example, see the [Primitives examples](/run/primitives-examples#sampler-examples) page.
```

  ```python
  # Generate a pass manager without providing a backend
  from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

  pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(optimization_level=1)
  isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)
  isa_observable = observable.apply_layout(isa_circuit.layout)
  ```
</Admonition>

### Initialize `Sampler`

To use the Sampler V2 implementation, follow the instructions to instantiate a
[`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler). If you want to maintain
your pre-existing workflow using a Sampler V1 implementation, you can also use the
[`qiskit.primitives.Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) class.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorSampler

sampler = StatevectorSampler()
```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="SamplerV1" label="Sampler (V1)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler

sampler = Sampler()
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
### Run and get results

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python

>    # execute 1 circuit with 3 parameter sets using Sampler V2
>     job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit, [vals1, vals2, vals3])])
>     pub_result = job.result()[0]
>     print(f" > Result class: {type(pub_result)}")
>     ```
>     ```text
>     > Result class: <class 'qiskit.primitives.PubResult'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # execute 1 circuit with Sampler V2
    job = sampler.run([isa_circuit]) 
    pub_result = job.result()[0]
    print(f" > Result class: {type(pub_result)}")
    ```
    ```text
    > Result class: <class 'qiskit.primitives.containers.pub_result.PubResult'>
```

    ```

  V2 primitives accept multiple PUBs as inputs, and each PUB gets its own result.
  Therefore, you can run different circuits with various parameter/observable combinations, and retrieve the PUB results:

    ```python
    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
    
    # create two circuits
    circuit1 = qc.copy()
    circuit2 = qc.copy()
    
    # transpile circuits 
    pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(optimization_level=1)
    isa_circuit1 = pm.run(circuit1)
    isa_circuit2 = pm.run(circuit2)

>     # execute 2 circuits with 1 parameter set using Sampler V2
>     job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit1, vals1), (isa_circuit2, vals1)])
>     pub_result_1 = job.result()[0]
>     pub_result_2 = job.result()[1]
>     print(f" > Result class: {type(pub_result)}")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # execute 2 circuits using Sampler V2
    job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit1), (isa_circuit2)])
    pub_result_1 = job.result()[0]
    pub_result_2 = job.result()[1]
    print(f" > Result class: {type(pub_result)}")
```

qc.measure_all()
qc.draw("mpl", style="iqp")
```
![Initial QuantumCircuit](/images/verify/simulate-with-qiskit-primitives/sampler-initialize.png "Initial QuantumCircuit")

<Admonition type="note">
Any quantum circuit passed to a Sampler **must** include measurements.
</Admonition>

> ### Initialize `Sampler`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Qiskit Runtime primitives workflow requires circuits to be transformed to only use instructions supported by the system (referred to as *instruction set architecture (ISA)* circuits). The reference primitives still accept abstract instructions, as they rely on local statevector simulations, but transpiling the circuit might still be beneficial in terms of circuit optimization. 

```python
# Generate a pass manager without providing a backend
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(optimization_level=1)
isa_circuit = pm.run(qc)
```python

### Initialize `Sampler`
```

To use the Sampler V2 implementation, follow the instructions to instantiate a
[`qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler). If you want to maintain
your pre-existing workflow using a Sampler V1 implementation, you can also use the
[`qiskit.primitives.Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) class.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import StatevectorSampler

sampler = StatevectorSampler()
```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="SamplerV1" label="Sampler (V1)">
    ```python
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler

sampler = Sampler()
```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
### Run and get results

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="SamplerV2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">
    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
> 
>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit = pm.run(circuit)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    # execute 1 circuit with 3 parameter sets using Sampler V2
    job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit, [vals1, vals2, vals3])])

>     counts = job.result()[0].data.meas.get_counts()

Reviewer 2: We talk about retrieving counts in the section below.

```suggestion
    pub_result = job.result()[0]
```

Reviewer 2: It is kind of messy to add code blocks as code suggestions, but I believe that the output of the print should be:  > Result class: <class 'qiskit.primitives.PubResult'>

    ```
  V2 primitives accept multiple PUBs as inputs, and each PUB gets its own result.

>   Therefore, you can run different circuits with various parameter/observable combinations,
>   which was not always possible in the V1 interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Therefore, you can run different circuits with various parameter/observable combinations, and retrieve the pub-wise results:
```

    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
> 
>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit1 = pm.run(circuit1)
>     isa_circuit2 = pm.run(circuit2)
> 
>     # execute 2 circuits with 1 parameter set using Sampler V2
>     job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit1, vals1), (isa_circuit2, vals1)])
>     counts1 = job.result()
>     counts2 = job.result()

Reviewer 2: There were some bugs in this snippet (probably my fault): there is no backend when working with reference primitives (so we can't do `generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)`) and the result retrieval was not following the V2 syntax:

```suggestion
    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
    
    # create two circuits
    circuit1 = qc.copy()
    circuit2 = qc.copy()
    
    # transpile circuits 
    pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(optimization_level=1)
    isa_circuit1 = pm.run(circuit1)
    isa_circuit2 = pm.run(circuit2)

    # execute 2 circuits with 1 parameter set using Sampler V2
    job = sampler.run([(isa_circuit1, vals1), (isa_circuit2, vals1)])
    pub_result_1 = job.result()[0]
    pub_result_2 = job.result()[1]
```

I also removed the comment about ISA because we actually don't have any backend to refer to (I'm fine with still calling the transpiled circuits isa_circuit because I think it helps, but tecnically there is no ISA here).

    ```
  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="SamplerV1" label="Sampler (V1)">
      Run Sampler by calling the [`qiskit.primitives.Sampler.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler#run)
    method, which returns an instance of [`qiskit.providers.JobV1`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1).
    You can get the results from the job (as a [`qiskit.primitives.SamplerResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.SamplerResult) object)
    with the [`qiskit.providers.JobV1.result`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.JobV1#result) method.

    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
> 
>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit = pm.run(circuit)
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    job = sampler.run(isa_circuit)
    result = job.result()
    print(result)
    ```

>     ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```text
```

    ```

      If you prefer to see the output keys as binary strings instead of decimal numbers, you can use the [`qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution.binary_probabilities`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution#binary_probabilities) method.

    ```python
    print(quasi_dist.binary_probabilities())
    ```

    ```python
    {'00': 0.4999999999999999, '11': 0.4999999999999999}
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Change run options

By default, the reference Sampler performs an exact statevector calculation based on the
[`quantum_info.Statevector`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector) class.
However, this can be modified to introduce the effect of the sampling overhead (also known as "shot noise").

With the introduction of the new V2 interface, the sampling overhead in the Sampler is now more precisely defined.
The new interface accepts a `shots` argument that can be defined at the "PUB level".

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="V2" label="StatevectorSampler (V2)">

    ```python
    # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit1 = pm.run(circuit1)
>     isa_circuit2 = pm.run(circuit2)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    # Sample two circuits at 128 shots each.
    sampler.run([isa_circuit1, isa_circuit2], shots=128)
    # Sample two circuits at different amounts of shots. The "None"s are necessary
    # as placeholders
    # for the lack of parameter values in this example.
    sampler.run([(isa_circuit1, None, 123), (isa_circuit2, None, 456)])
    ```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="V1" label="Sampler (V1)">

      The V1 interface specifies shots in the following ways:

        - Setting keyword arguments in the [`Sampler.run`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler#run) method.
        - Modifying the [`Sampler`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Sampler) options.

    ```python

>     # Circuits and parameters must obey the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) of a particular backend.
>     from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=backend, optimization_level=1)
>     isa_circuit = pm.run(circuit)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     job = sampler.run(isa_circuit, observable, shots=2048, seed=123)

Reviewer 2: No observable here:

```suggestion
    job = sampler.run(isa_circuit, shots=2048, seed=123)
```
